what advice would you give me to make
sure that my relationship stays fresh
and new and spicy actually there's a
great study that when people their
sexual desire for the partner goes up Dr
tally Sher she's a neuroscientist author
one of the world's leading researchers
On Emotion decision making and how to
change our brains for the better this is
negatively affecting your life and you
don't know it we have a study where we
asked people what was your favorite part
on your vacation and we found the peak
of enjoyment was 43 hours into the
vacation and people used one word more
than any other word and it was the word
first the first view of the ocean the
first cocktail and then the joy goes
down and down and down why it's because
the input into your neurons is constant
and when things are not changing our
brain just stops responding and the
problem is that even if you're living
your absolute best life great
relationship a good job comfortable home
after a while those things don't bring
us the joy that they should cuz when
something is always in front of you you
stop attending to it that's true also
for the not so great thing around us
sexism racism cracks in our
relationships after a while we don't
notice them and if we don't notice them
we don't change them one reason why
happiness is low in midlife is because
things are a little bit more routine the
problem is we really don't like Risk
taking so how do we change that two main
things one is
quick one this is really really
fascinating to me on the back end of our
YouTube channel it says that
69.9% of you that watch this channel
frequently over the lifetime of this
channel haven't yet hit the Subscribe
button I just wanted to ask you a favor
it helps this channel so much if you
choose to subscribe helps us scale the
guest helps us scale the production and
it makes the show bigger so if I could
ask you for one favor if you've watched
the show before and you've enjoyed it
and you like this episode that you're
currently watching could you please hit
the Subscribe button thank you so much
and I will repay that gesture by making
sure that everything we do here gets
better and better and better and better
that is a promise I'm willing to make
you do we have a
[Music]
deal
tell welcome back thank you for having
me back to be here for those people that
aren't familiar with your career can you
give us a little bit of an overview of
your academic background but really I
guess the summary of the mission that
you're on and the work that you've done
what are you trying to understand what
is it that you're you're trying to do
with your professional life so in very
general terms I'm trying to understand
human behavior why do people do what
they do why do they feel the way that
they do um and I use a lot of different
methods to try to understand that so I
use Neuroscience method I really kind of
try to look inside people's brains also
I look at Behavior so I'm kind of
combining psychology brain science I
also combine economics to try to
understand motives to try to understand
needs um and hopefully use that not only
for us to understand human brains better
but also to make our life better perhaps
make better decisions for anyone that's
listening to this right now that is has
a vision of who they want to become and
it's different from who they currently
are in some way habits behaviors they
want to adopt is step one awareness is
that step one awareness of your own CES
and thoughts and patterns one thing you
should concentrate on and be aware of is
what is already good about yourself
right so not only what do I want to
become which I'm not but what am I which
is great what already great skills I
have right personality traits I have
because those are things that you can
build on right and so look at it not
only in this kind of negative way but
look at it in a positive ways and so
once once you've that yes then we can
say okay this is my goal right and the
next thing is how do I go from where I
am to this goal and if you have a
specific plan and you you're not
necessarily going to follow that exact
plan right but if you have a plan and
you kind of really think through the
details what happens is that if you can
imagine that vividly that will then
create your belief that it's more likely
to happen right if we have a specific
plan concrete that makes a feel it's
more likely to happen and if we think
it's more likely to happen we're more
likely to follow through and then
there's a lot of little tricks of how to
get us to follow through uh one really
important one is looking at your
progress so say you want to go to the
gym
and at the first week you only go once a
week and then the next week you go twice
a week or maybe when you're go you go
the first time you go you're only
running on the treadmill for 10 minutes
right and then next time 20 minutes but
put down those numbers so you can
actually see them cuz when people can
actually see their progress that is
extremely motivating right you always
want to be a little bit above from where
you were so that's that's one thing
that's hugely important is there sort of
scientific research that supports this
idea that progress has a very sort of
motivational impact on people yes
absolutely there are great studies one
study that I'm thinking of um was where
people had to do a task which required
them to learn the rules and they would
get money um rewards for doing it well
and every so often they ask people how
are you feeling right now what they
found is yes when people got rewards
when they got money they were feeling
good but turns out that they felt the
best when they learned something new
right when they
progressed that's when they were really
feeling the best and there was there's
another study in which people could play
one of two games one game all the rules
were clear it was really easy for them
to do the best that they could do in
another game there was a bit of
uncertainty they had to learn it wasn't
clear right it was challenging to some
some respect and they could play those
two games and then every every few
minutes they said okay you could stay in
this game or you can move to the other
game what they found is people liked to
play the game where they had to learn
where there was uncertainty they did not
like to play the game where they always
did well where there were not
progressing where there's nothing to
learn so progress is really something
that we strive for and when it happens
that really makes us feel better right
it makes us feel like we're moving
forward we don't like this St even if
where you are is great right really
really great after a while it's not
enough right you want to expand you want
to progress those subject matters appear
in your new book look again when you're
talking about the import of variety in
our lives and it really shows up in all
aspects of Our Lives this need for
variety um which you're kind of talking
about there people want to try something
new they want to learn something new
they want to be stimulated in some way
it's very true in work you talk about
that a lot and as an employer really
kind of hit me that one of the
most effective things I could do to keep
my team members motivated would probably
be to like change their jobs quite often
or at least add new elements to their
responsibilities quite often
yeah what the book is about is about
habituation and habituation is basically
the phenomena which governs basically
every part of our brain which is we
don't respond to things that don't
change when things are constant where
they're not changing our brain just
stops responding and once you do change
things around even a little bit then we
start responding
again and at work you know it's often
the case in in big companies for example
that people will take employees and will
let them rotate through different
divisions once in a while right because
if you're staying at the same place
doing the same thing over and over and
over and over again you become
complacent to some extent right but once
you change you're now talking to maybe a
little different people maybe the
projects are a little bit
different then you start you start
encoding again it also enhances your
creativity the word habitu is quite a
long word I'm sure most people won't be
familiar with the word probably never
heard it before I didn't hear about
habituation until I was doing a lot of
research ahead of my book and came
across a lot of your research but a
really interesting way to
illustrate what habit habituation is is
with images like this now tell me tell
me what's going on here we're going to
put this image on the screen and also
for those that of you that are listening
on audio there will be a link to this
image in the description of this episode
but essentially when you look at this
image in the center of this image for 30
seconds especially when you're looking
at it on a computer screen all of the
colors disappear if you stay focused on
that black dot in the middle of this
image for 30 seconds so this was a
discovery by um a Austrian physi
physician in 1804 what he discovered is
that if you look you have to not move
your eyes so fixate on the black cross
and don't move your eyes the colors fade
away they become gray and if you're
really good at this I've done this a few
times and I was I was able to do this
actually the gray goes away and the
whole thing just becomes
white why is that it's because the input
into your neurons if you're not moving
your eyes um is constant so the neurons
are just getting the same input so they
stop responding they're like well
there's nothing new here you know let's
save our resources for something else
that's going to come along so you stop
noticing the color all together and that
that is habituation now once you move
your
eyes color comes back right or if
anything moves in the background like
yeah well you do yeah yeah so then um if
you're moving your eyes then the input
into different norns change and then you
consciously perceive the colors again
and I think it's the same in our life if
everything is constant we don't perceive
the good and we don't perceive the bad
but if we move our eyes enough you know
metaphorically then we'll start noticing
and Feeling Again do all animals do this
habituation thing yeah so it's something
really fundamental you see this in every
living creature um and I think to me
that's what's so interesting about this
right because something that seems to
affect every part of our life from our
relationships to our mental health to
our ability to innovate you can actually
track it down and you can see it's in
every living animal there's this
habituation the fact that neurons
respond less and less to things that
don't change right and that's true for
things just like sound if you hear the
same sound again and again and again and
again you're no longer conscious of it
you're no longer responding to it so
that's just perceptual habituation but
habituation is also true for the
fundamental things in our life that we
really care about and this is why people
can have really great things in their
life and I'm sure you do right maybe
like a great relationship a good job or
a comfortable home but what's
interesting is that after a while those
things don't bring us the Daily joy that
they should right because we kind of
habituate it to it sort of like what
what is thrilling on Monday becomes
boring on Friday and the interesting
thing is that's true also for the not so
great thing around us so there might be
bad things around us like uh sexism RAC
RAC ISM cracks in our relationships or
inefficiencies at work but if they're
there all the time after a while we
don't notice them and if we don't notice
them we don't try to change them where
does this come from this this idea that
once we're exposed to something we kind
of phase out and can't see it
anymore it's because if something is in
front of us for a while and we're still
alive nothing bad happened right then
the brain doesn't really need to respond
to it anymore because the brain's trying
to conserve resources right right we
need the resources to be ready for the
new thing that is coming your way right
which can be threatening or it could
also be really great like you know food
or something that you should grab um and
that's that's basically why we stop
responding of course if someone
something is hurting you right you will
continue responding to that which is why
it's it's it's a little bit difficult to
habituate to pain that's one to pain
yeah
mhm what are some of your um your
favorite examples of everyday
habituation of everyday habituation yeah
like things that yeah yeah I told you
mine before we started recording which
was um if I go to the gym and then I
come home I can no longer smell myself
because you can I can smell myself for
maybe a couple of minutes when I'm
working out that I'm like getting hot
and sweaty but then once I'm around
myself for like 10 minutes I guess my
brain is just no longer sending the
signal from my armpits to my through my
nasal recept is to my brain yeah so
smell is is really a good one CU that
happens really really fast right so if
you put a perfume in yourself it really
smells strongly but then you put the
same perfume a day later you don't smell
it as much a week later you don't smell
it that much so those are really easy to
see around us but I think to me the more
interesting ones are habituating to
things that we um enjoy a lot and then
we enjoy less and less and less and
things that are really bad but we stop
noticing so for example there's a great
study in which uh people were asked to
think about a song that they like tell
me a song that you like or even an
artist that you like oh gosh there's one
I'm listening to at the moment house
Gospel Choir angels watching over me
okay would you prefer to hear that song
from beginning to end no interruptions
or would you prefer to hear it with
breaks with breaks yeah I don't want to
hear it with breakes okay you want to
hear it the the full thing the full
thing right and you think you would
enjoy it more correct yeah okay 99% of
people say exactly what you say right
I'm going to enjoy the song more if I
just hear I listen to it continuously
with no breaks but
counterintuitively when the study was
conducted it was shown that people
actually end up enjoying a song more if
there are Breaks by breaks you mean they
just put gaps in it gaps in it and in
fact what's more interesting is not only
did they put caps for different groups
of people they did different things
doing the gaps maybe there's quiet it
maybe there's an annoying noise and it
didn't matter what they did in the gaps
when you had gaps in the song people
enjoyed it more which is really
counteractive right and they were
willing to pay twice as much to hear
that song in concert so why is that so
if you hear a song that you really like
it's really joyful but it turns out that
over the whatever two minutes three
minutes four minutes of the song The Joy
kind of goes down you habituate a little
bit right if you have a break your the
joy is quite High and then it starts
going down there's a break and so then
you go back up right right and so you
habituate a little bit but then you go
back up so overall you're enjoying the
music more and they did the same with
massages so what do you prefer a 1 hour
massage or 20 minutes massage break 20
minutes massage break 20 minutes massage
break the 1 hour massage why again
everyone says I prefer the one hour
massage but again when they did the
study and they ask people how much did
you enjoy it the group who had breaks
ended up enjoying it more so what you're
saying is we need to put more bloody
adverts in this podcast that's exactly
what I this was exactly what I was
thinking people are loving the adverts
because you think you're you know
intellectually you think oh these ads
are annoying but I think what's
happening and you know no one's actually
done this this exact experiment but they
should I think that in fact people may
enjoy your podcast more with the ads
even if you kind even if they go through
it like that it's Gap it is possible and
that was my thought exactly comments now
like we [__] don't want anymore yeah
they're so interesting and one of my
favorite examples is actually
vacation so holidays um so I did um I
was working on this project with a big
uh tourism company in the UK and they
wanted to know what makes people enjoy
holidays the most right when do they
enjoy the holiday the most and why so we
did survey and we went on these resorts
to interview people and we found two
interesting things the first was that
the peak of enjoyment was 43 hours into
the
vacation and why is that well we think
the reason is that first you get to the
resort and then you have to unpack you
know all of that and then you start
really enjoying it and then the joy goes
down and down and down over time you're
still enjoying your holiday a lot but
the peak is with in 43 hours and then
the related second uh bit of data that
we saw is that when we asked people what
was your favorite part of the vacation
people used one word more than any other
word and it was the word first so they
said the first view of the ocean the
first dip in the water first
cocktail right they enjoyed the second
time they went into the pool the third
time but they enjoyed the first the most
because firsts are kind of Novel right
and then you habituate the second time
you enjoy it a little bit less than the
third time enjo late you're still
enjoying it but not as much as the first
time so does that mean that for holidays
in I think you argue this point in the
book you do yeah about instead of doing
you know four week holidays it's much
better to do weekend breaks because if
it's 42 hours or so that's optimal
enjoyment right so you're trying to
think about how can I maximize my
enjoyment right and when it comes to
Vacation maybe one one good idea is
instead of going for a twoe vacation
during the year maybe you know have a
few long weekends vacations now of
course if you're flying somewhere far
then you might not be able to do it it's
a cost and so on but you might consider
instead of going to the farway vacation
for two weeks maybe you want to go
somewhere closer to home but have more
of them because then you get more firsts
you Al also get more afterglows so
that's when you coming back from
vacation and you're still happy because
you were just on vacation and you're
also getting more of the anticip a of
the vacation interesting which is hugely
beneficial for your wellbeing the
anticipation part before um you're
actually even there at the resort or
wherever you're going I mean this begs
the question about the other thing we
habituate to which a lot of us don't
want to admit which is our partners and
our sex lives two things I've talked a
lot on this podcast about um as it
relates to things that we kind of get
used to and then no longer can get the
same level of I don't know pleasure
happiness appreciation gratitude from um
does it apply to relationships and sex
yeah so I think it does and I think the
solution is very similar breaks and I
don't mean like a relationship break
right what I mean is have you know an
evening for yourself go on a weekend
perhaps on your own and then when you
come back everything kind of resp
sparkles is there any data to prove this
CU it's a feeling something that we all
know intuitively like and my partner
both know that when we're spending time
apart is good for our relationship every
relationship knows that it's good for
our sex life it's good for our our
appreciation of each other but is there
any data that supports this yes and I
I'll tell you what the data is which is
so obvious you think is like why do
people even do a study about this but
there's one study and it simply shows
that when people are away from their
partner their desire their sexual desire
for the partner goes up what is it about
our partner going away that makes us
want the it's related to habituation
right but it's also related to where
your attention is when something is
always in front of you you sort of stop
attending to it because it's always
there and so your brain then goes okay
what else do I need to get right but if
they're not there then your attention
can go back to them and then there is a
more basic level of how pleasure works
there's this great quote by the econ
Tyber kovski and he says that pleasure
results from incomplete and intermittent
satisfaction of desires right incomplete
yes so the idea is that you always
wanting a little bit more okay right
intimidate meaning there's breaks and
then you always and it's incomplete
because you always want a little bit
more and I think that quote is you can
apply it to almost everything right even
to food there's an another um fun
experiment where they have two groups
and one group was given mac and cheese
to eat which they really liked every day
for you know a few weeks and of course
they like the mac and cheese of the
first day they liked it in the second
day but after a while they couldn't you
know they couldn't see mac and cheese
anymore they really did not want mac and
cheese um while the other group got mac
and cheese just once a week and they
enjoyed the MC and cheese much more
right and so it's true for food it's
true for music it's true for our
relationships it's rof
fications what's that type what's that
restaurant where they the chef brings
you I don't know like 13 different
courses of food oh that's too much so
that's not good okay so here's here's
what I think about choices um you first
of all you don't want to give people no
choice at all right so if there's a
restaurant where you get no choice at
all I don't think that is overall a good
idea I mean what you could do for
example if you want if you want to have
a restaurant where there's an option
that the chef decides still make it a
choice right so you can have on the menu
Chef's Choice but I'm still you know
sitting there and deciding okay the chef
is going to choose for me but that's
still my choice why does that matter
because um it is well known that first
having a choice is really important for
people's sense of control and for for
their enjoyment and once they choose
something they like it better than if
someone else Cho for them they really
you know one thing that we really don't
like humans really don't like and
actually other animals as well is having
no agency having no choice that causes
anxiety so we do want to make sure that
people have a choice at the same time
you don't want to have too many options
because that can be overwhelming right
there's the um famous uh experiment
where people are given an option to
choose between 60 different jams and
some people are so overwhelmed they just
leave the store empty-handed so you
don't want to go to right too much
choice that could be just overwhelming
because there's you know for like too
much cognitive resources right anything
that that we do that
requires an amount of cognitive resource
that is above some kind of threshold can
feel
aversive right so having a choice where
you have to choose too many things
that's not good on the other hand not
being able to choose any
that's not good either so you want to be
somewhere in in the middle going back to
this this subject matter of
relationships what advice would you give
me based on everything you know about
habituation to make sure that my
relationship stays spicy and uh we go
the long term what things can I you know
what do I need to be aware of what what
things can I do okay so just thinking
about like habituation related things
yeah I would say two main things one is
breaks
meaning having some distance once in a
while right okay and the second is doing
new things together okay right because
if you're always doing the same thing
over and over and over which couples
sometimes do there are like a few things
that they like to do right because it's
hard because each person has their own
preferences of what they like and then
you find an overlap and that overlap is
not necessarily huge so then you just
you know do the same thing over and over
so I think as a couple it is good to
explore and I don't don't necessarily
mean like sexually but just everything
like what type of movies you're going to
watch and you know what type of
activities and that can also expand your
experiences together right on the point
of sex so I do think sex can get boring
if you don't constantly try new things
it's just it's if you plan to be with
someone for 50 years finding new things
to try is
work to be honest and I guess life is
work so it's work worth doing you know
I'm almost almost I know almost five
years into my relationship with a little
bit of a gap in between and it's a
conversation we've had a lot which is
how do we keep things fresh and new and
interesting and spicy because like any
couple or like any people you fall into
as you say like Comfort habits we go to
this restaurant because we know it and
they know us you know you go to this
place because you know the place and you
that's your favorite restaurant there or
whatever you watch this thing on TV you
follow this okay this cycle of Monday to
Monday to Sunday Monday we do this then
Saturday and Sunday we do this you know
and it can be it can the monotony can
seem to take a joy out of life right yes
and I think you want a little bit of
balance so some of this kind of routine
and things you're familiar with there's
something nice about that as well right
so it's not I'm not saying every weekend
do something completely new right but
just so you have your kind of routines
and then
you know you insert some novel
activities or something something new so
it's it's kind of a BAL a balance
between exploring new things but also
exploiting the things that you enjoy do
you think there's a because I was
thinking about it as you were speaking
about men and women if there's a
difference in their ability to habituate
and in my experience maybe that's just
because I've always been the man in the
situation um I'm less likely to seek
spontaneity I think in terms of like
coming up with new ideas for places us
to go my girlfriend she's so like let's
go to this flower thing let's go to this
then let's go to this play Let's go over
here she's very explorative so I was
just wondering if there was a variance
you'd ever seen in any research about a
man's ability to habituate versus a
woman's no I haven't so I don't
necessarily think there is and I don't
necessarily think that it is a case that
men are more explor explorative or more
um exploring but and this is not Based
on data this is just my observation I
often hear that people say I like to
explore but my partner yeah likes to do
the same or I like to just do the same
all the time but my partner likes to
explore I hear this again and again it's
true in my own relationship my my
co-author C Einstein who wrote the book
with me um he also says exactly the same
right so for him he likes to exploit and
his wife likes to explore for me it's
like I like to explore my husband likes
to exploit and I hear this again and
again and that makes me think that it is
not a
coincidence um that is perhaps the case
that people who like to explore end up
with people who like to exploit because
to do the best that we can in life we
need to do bothh so maybe it is you know
this balance interesting to individuals
because if you're left on your own and
just exploring all the
time you might not get to the optimal
balance in life MH if you're exploiting
all the time then you're unlikely to
find these new things right that will
actually be great for you you will learn
gain you pleasure and so on so um it may
not be a coincidence and I think in in a
lot of these traits almost every
psychological trait that you can think
of they are individual differences you
can go all the way from one extreme to
The Other Extreme right if we're talking
about optimism all the way to pessimism
exploration all the way to exploitation
right and everything in the and normally
it's kind of a bell curve of sorts um
and I think it's not a coincidence right
because if you think about a society a
group a team working together you do
need these variations for people to push
each other in different directions such
that as a team we get to the best that
we can we can get we talked about
learning a little bit earlier on and
about the importance of of change and
Novelty I'm someone that's just Fallen
back into the habit of reading books
again and writing about them and it's
brought a huge amount of lost joy to my
life and I and I had almost lost sight
of it through becoming so busy in my
professional life I'd lost the um Joy of
learning new things and because I do
this podcast as well and it seems to I
learn so much from speaking to the
people I speak to but just recently
getting back into reading books again
has brought this new sort of excitement
to my life and your book has is provides
a lot of evidence as to why that might
be yeah I think it is it is a case that
probably you know in recent years people
are reading less right um and we kind of
forget the joy of reading whether it is
fiction or
non-fiction I think the difference
between reading a book than watching a
video is when you read a book there's an
extra mental activity that you're doing
which is you're imagining you're
visualizing right it's also in your own
pace so you read something and maybe
that elicit triggers some kind of
Association in your mind right so you
might like stop for a little bit and
then continue so there's so much more
going on and I think because of that
when you read a book you can relate that
more to yourself and to your own life
right versus I mean watching I mean
films like that that's great as well but
that that is a difference right it's
more about you and your inner
experiences and memories coming more
alive and then it also ties to what you
already know the midlife crisis
is this a real thing yeah absolutely it
is well known that stress is the peaks
in your midlife and happiness um goes
down in your midlife suicide for example
Peaks especially for male um in midlife
definitely like something that we should
think of and notice um and we don't
really know for sure why it happens but
one thing that happens in midlife is
that you have a lot of stressors coming
your way um so we're talking about 40s
and 50s so you have you might need you
have little kids that you need to take
care of maybe you have elderly parents
that you're worried about uh
professional life has a lot of stressors
in midlife so that's really a time where
we see the midlife crisis but one thing
that we think is that perhaps this is
also a time that you're not progressing
as much right so kind of in your 20s and
so on you learn a lot you gain G skills
you get to perhaps a good
position and then it's sort of
plateauing right for a lot of people it
can kind of plateau in midlife perhaps
they have a good job right but they're
kind of stuck they're not really moving
as much they're not learning as much
less variety right things are a little
bit more routine and that could be one
reason why happiness is relatively low
in midlife
it's also hard to see like what is next
sometimes right while you're climbing up
it's you're kind of well this is my goal
but once you get there it's a little bit
disappointing to some extent even if
you've done really well right because as
we talked before one thing that is
really important for our happiness is
kind of us believing that we have
something to gain something to go
forward to now why does then happiness
go back up after midlife right so we
don't know but here is one speculation
that at at a certain point in time uh
maybe you're
retiring then actually Life Changes
again right in an odd way there can
actually be more variety and CH and
change and learning you need to learn
how to live life again with this new
context of not going to work every day
and you know and you might make
decisions all sorts of decisions of what
to do with your time which will require
you to learn
again when you get to so say 40 40 50
years old you're probably in a
relationship which you've been in for a
while there's not that there's not that
Pursuit your job your career your
profession your identity your geography
your house friendship circles are
probably all well established at that
point and your hypothesis is that the
lack of forward motion and the abundance
of routine means that you lose something
in life yeah so things are less new
right
it's kind of same same same imagine the
best day of your life you wake up in the
morning and you eat like the best
breakfast that you can think of right
choose and then you you interact with
the people that you love the most and
you go do the best activity like what
you want and you see your favorite movie
so the whole day is your favorite
favorite favorite favorite things really
great and then you wake up the same the
next day and you do the same and then
you wake up the next day and you do the
same right a weekend a few few weeks in
the best day of your life just doesn't
elicit as much joy right and also
there's nothing to learn anymore so even
if you're living your absolute best life
if it is the same again and again and
again and
again it will eventually be a little bit
even depressing I would say so that's by
definition not our best life right so so
then it is what is our best life so I
think when people think about
what my best life is what they're
thinking about is oh I want that great
house right I want that great partner I
want money or you know and then you can
get all of these things but if they
remain constant that's just not going to
be your best life and you can engineer
this I mean even if it's like midlife
and everything is set and you're in one
house and so on for example you can go
take a course learn something new right
a new fields that is not your own you
can go a new sport right there's things
that you could do go visit places that
you haven't been try to um make
connections with people that are a bit
different from your regular crowd that
you're interacting with it's a little
bit hard to do because it's going to
require effort the easiest thing to do
is just continue same same same same
same we assume that happiness will be
derived from us
um I almost don't know how to say this
like from us being on autopilot like if
we do what Society said you work a job
you get a partner you create a house you
we assume that will lead to happiness
but what you're saying is the research
shows that we actually need to keep
almost dismantling or disrupting our own
experience to to find happiness or to be
happy I guess we can't find happiness we
be happy yeah they did a whole bunch of
surveys to figure out what are the
factors that are most associated with
people's happiness and the number one
was meaning right people who could say I
have meaning in my life that was number
one number two was control people who
felt they have control over their life
um and I don't remember what number
income was but it wasn't especially high
oh I think social so social connections
was really high as well right so a lot
of these things were these psychological
things not necessarily material things
that really induced uh people's
happiness and satisfaction from their
life somewhat linked to that studies
show that after getting married people
report to being happier on average yet
about two years after their honeymoon
period happiness levels tend to be the
same as their pre-marriage levels yeah
so this is a well-known What's called
the hedonic treadmill oh yeah so the
hedonic treadmill means that we sort of
have a basine level of Happiness which
is determined a lot is genetic it might
be determined by early childhood
experiences and we can move from that
Baseline we can go up if something good
happens maybe you have a good Rel
relationship marriage uh you get a
promotion it can go down if something
bad happens even
bement but it turns out that it in most
cases you climb back to your Baseline
level of Happiness so these things they
can go up and they can down and then you
kind of adapt right um and at you end up
trying you know and this goes back to
this idea that we're trying to get all
these things we think of once I get this
promotion then I'll be really happy and
then you get the promotion and it's
great but then after a while you just go
back to your Baseline now on on one hand
this actually is not a bad thing because
imagine you get your first entry level
job and people are really happy with
their first entry level job great but
imagine I just continue being really
happy with my first entry-level job
right I won't be motivated to move
forward right so this is why habituation
is there because it's moving us forward
as an indiv ual and and as a society on
the other hand it also reduces our joy
um and it also sometimes causes us not
to see some of the bad things around us
because we habituate to that as well
another reason why habituation is
important is for your mental health
right and that's kind of related to what
we just talked about where bad things
happen and slowly slowly slowly we adapt
and we go back to Baseline we are able
to recover right it's kind of our
superpower our IM immense ability to
just bounce back for most individuals
and what's interesting is that you
actually see that people with depression
they habituate much
slower so there was a great study that
was conducted in the University of
Florida by a professor Aaron heler where
he had students um who just got exam
results and he asked them how they were
feeling and then he asked them how they
were feeling after every 45 minutes for
the whole day and what he found is when
people bad results they were feeling bad
right they're not happy and that's true
for people who never had depression
episodes in their life and people who
were experiencing depression or had
depression before so everyone was
feeling bad at the beginning those
people who did not have any history of
depression they slowly slowly slowly
started feeling better from this bad
grade those with depression also started
feeling better but much slower right so
in other words depression is related to
slow slower habituation slower recovery
from negative events in your life and
one reason we think this is is because
depression is related to going over
these bad events in your mind again and
again not letting go right you're kind
of like chewing over them again and
again and again and that is something
that is preventing you from recovering
and bouncing back from these um aversive
events if if um habituation
is causes us
to lose the joy of our current situation
then how come as you say in Chapter 2
the chapter about variety you say that
up to 40% of employees resign within the
first six months of their new job you'd
think their new job would bring them Joy
because it was different but up to 40%
of employees resign within the first six
months so new things can bring a joory
because they're different yeah however
at the same time and this kind of goes
back to the vacation example that I gave
you which was people are not the
happiest when they just get to the
resort it takes them time right it takes
them 43 hours to get to the peak Joy why
because they still need the time to
adapt right they need to unpack they
need to get used to this new routine
same thing with a new job for example so
on one hand getting a new job you're
going to learn things and that's great
and eventually it will get you Joy but
when you f when you're there for the
first first day or the first few days
there's a lot of getting used to things
around you right you need to like figure
who's who right who's on top who's in
the bottom like where is a cafeteria
what am I going to eat there's so many
different things that you need to figure
out it can be stressful it can be
overwhelming and you often want to just
like run back to your old life run back
to your new job and do a U-turn and the
problem is that often people don't
predict this they can't see ahead right
they think it's like well I'm unhappy
with my new job on my first day or my
second day or even the first week that
means that this is not a good job for me
you know perhaps it's not a good job for
you or perhaps you just need to allow it
some time to adapt so you know my
recommendation is whatever it is that
you're trying that's new can also be
something like a new relationship right
give it some time because you're going
to have to get used to the things that
are also not great you will also get
things you get used to things are great
but you have to get used to those things
that are not great and then after a
while you won't see them anymore right
so not going to affect you as much so
give a time now if you gave it time and
still you're unhappy sure yeah make a
change there's a clear message in here
for managers employees CEOs Founders
about how to keep their team motivated
and engaged and the message that I'm
hearing is the importance in creating
Variety in their work because I always
think in businesses I'm involved in if
someone's doing this same thing for like
12 months we're going to have a have to
have a conversation within the next 3
months because they will typically come
to me and say like something's not
something's not right and it's typically
that people need a bit of variety in
their work I guess because that gives it
a little kick of meaning again you know
I I think I've always hypothesized that
people need like five things to really
like their jobs number one is a sense of
Forward Motion towards a a goal so
that's progress I guess feeling like
you're go make making forward motion
number two challenge they need to be
like sufficiently challenged not too
challenged because then there's lots of
issues underchallenged lots of issues
lose motivation like in game psychology
number three is control and autonomy so
feeling like you've got control over
your life your work number four is
meaning in the work you're doing
subjective meaning Jack's reason for
doing this podcast will be entirely
different from someone else in the team
for example and then the last one is
working in like a supportive group of
people there's a lot of studies about
this that you want a situation
where you're learning something because
if you're learning nothing people are
not engaged right but if it's like so
difficult that you can't learn right
people aren't happy as well so you have
to be like in this the spot in the
middle right that's a sweet spot and
again it's different for everyone right
where it's not too easy but it's not too
difficult so you have something to learn
but you're still progressing and that's
very important there's a great study
showing that if you put people in a room
and there's absolutely nothing for them
to do except to shock themselves they
will shock themselves like little shock
I don't mean you know um this this paper
was actually in science a few years ago
so meaning that boredom can be so
aversive to people they would actually
prefer physical pain than to just not do
anything at all so that's on the one
hand and then of course on the other
hand is when you're sitting in in a you
know in a class or you're listening to
Electra and you have no idea what's it's
too much right because you haven't
gotten there maybe you'll take the steps
eventually you'll get there but but you
know you started off by saying for
employees you need to kind of change
right give them different projects and
so on and what's interesting not only
will they enjoy it more they're more
likely to get to Creative Solutions
start with the fact that what what has
been found is that people who habituate
slower are more creative um so there's
different ways to measure how fast you
habituate what they did in this study is
that they had a sound the same sound
again and again and again and they
measured Kink conductance which shows um
so it is how aroused you are when you're
aroused you sweat more okay and that is
measured by the skin conductance right
and so when there's like a sound there's
a response so if a sound is the same
sound again and again and again most
people habituate there's no longer
response you know long skin conductance
but for some people they continue
responding right because they're not
habituating and what was found is those
those people who continue responding
those were the people who already showed
creativity in their life they had a
patent under their name they had an
exhibition in an art gallery they had a
book that they wrote they had um got
prizes for Innovative work and the
question is why is that and I think the
reason is that because of habituation we
filter a lot of information right and
you know it makes sense information is
not important but if you don't habituate
you're going to have a lot of bits of
information in your mind simmering
objects sounds bits and pieces of
knowledge that are not important on
their own but they're just going to stay
in your mind they're going to simmer and
once in a while they will create
something new and that's where
Innovation comes in and really if you
think about the most Creative Solutions
that people come up with it's usually
they take something from one field
something really boring unimportant
mundane
and that bit of mundane piece of
information then solves a problem in
this other completely different field
and or there's like this part of
knowledge here that is boring and this
other part of knowledge in this other
field that also seems very mundane but
you put them together and suddenly you
create something that is really really
interesting uh and creative right I mean
often you see for example people taking
what they know from biology
which you know on its own doesn't seem
so important but then they take that and
they use it to solve a problem in a
different field technology for example
right that is like the most Creative
Solutions so how do we facilitate that
how do we facilitate dishabituation in
order to enhance creativity and the
answer is change changing your
environment and it could be simple
things there studies showing that if you
just change your environment let's say
say you're working in the office for a
few hours and you go work for in a
coffee shop for a few hours right that
change can actually also enhance
creativity um you're sitting and working
and then you're going out and walking or
going out for a run um studies show for
the first six minutes you're going to be
more creative and also vice versa so if
you are out walking out running and then
you come back and you sit in your office
for the next 6 minutes you're going to
be more creative now six minutes may
sound like that's not a lot of time but
sometimes there's just enough for you to
get the aha moment I can remember those
instances where I came up with an idea
that would then change my course of
research for a long time those ideas
that were really important so if I think
about these examples like one example
was I was in the office trying to solve
this problem and I couldn't find a
solution so I decided to go to the gym
and then so I walked to the gym and then
before while I was walking while I was
getting to the gym that's when you know
the solution came about and I remember
like calling my student and like sharing
that and that would then change years of
what we we were going to do right so
just all I did was changed my physical
activity change just my physical
surrounding and that's exactly what
these studies show um or another example
was again I was in my office and I took
a break and I was reading the New York
Times science section so not hugely
different but still different right and
then I read something about monkeys and
I do humans and that again that was ooh
that I an idea came about by taking a
break and doing something that was a
little bit different and I think every
single example of this it's always like
that it's never me trying to think of
something new me trying to find a
solution it's always doing something
else which then something unusual not
something that I do like 90% of the time
in a day and that doing those times is
when these kind of new ideas came about
you know the brain generally having
spent so much time studying it what are
the the fundamental surprises you've
come to learn about humans that you
think most people just don't understand
or agree with like the things that we
don't want to believe about ourselves
that are unfortunately
true things that are unfortunately true
I see this I read this throughout your
work things where you go humans wouldn't
say they're like that if you ask them
but clearly they are because of the
research right yeah I mean it is true
that we're not conscious of most of
these kind of systematic mistakes that
we make and the biases that we have for
example I mean maybe our belief system
is a great
example of why we believe what we
believe I think that if you'd ask people
why do you believe a certain thing they
would probably give you some kind of
rational explanation right I believe
this thing because you know here's all
the evidence and so forth but in fact
most of the times the reason we believe
believe something is that we were
brought up in an environment where that
belief was a popular one or people
around us Believe it or we've heard it
again and again you know one interesting
thing is this is a huge effect where
people are are not aware of it as long
as you hear something um repeatedly even
twice the likelihood that you believe it
goes way up versus something that you
hear once it's called the illus truth
effect you just there's so many studies
showing this you let people you you tell
people something twice they don't
remember that they've heard it twice and
they're going to believe it way more
than something that they just heard once
um the reason for this is that the brain
process information that it's heard
before less right okay so let's say I
tell you that
um a shrimp's heart is in its head right
so when you hear that that sounds really
surprising and your brain takes a lot of
resources to process this you might
think about the last time I ate a shrimp
um right or just imagine the shrimp's
heart is in his head but the second time
I'm going to tell you this a shrimp's
heart is in his head your brain's not
going to processes at much right and the
third time it's not going to process at
all now when your brain takes less
effort in processing things that causes
um a signal of
familiarity and as a result we're more
likely to believe something when
something requires less effort and less
energy to process we believe it
more so anything that you hear again and
again and again as you hear it more and
more and more it takes less energy to
process and if it takes less energy to
process our brain then concludes that is
as likely true and for good reason
because most of the time when you hear
something again and again again most of
the time it's true so if you heard
something from you know your aunt and
then you heard it from your friend and
then you heard it from your doctor why
do all the people tell you all these
things because on average it's true but
sometimes it's not going to be true
right it's going to be false beliefs
right and even even things like it takes
you less energy to process a large front
14 font bold it takes us less energy to
process it versus like small font yeah
we see that across the board in all of
our marketing companies is that if we
just make the font a little bit bigger
we get more clicks so it just a tiny bit
click yeah not only are people more
attentive they're going to believe it
more so there's studies showing that you
show people two sentences um one is in
big fonts bold and one is in small and
you ask them you know How likely is this
to be true How likely is that to be true
those sentences that are in big bald
fonts people are more likely to believe
they're true because the brain requires
less energy to process it which then
makes us conclude that it's likely to be
true and it's true for like for example
if you do it with like red color right
anything that makes it easier for for us
to process if we hear things more
clearly we're more likely to believe
that's true than if you put a little bit
of noise um people are less likely to
believe things are are true anytime that
it's hard for us to process so what that
means is if you want people to um if you
want to help them believe what you're
saying right take on your
recommendations you want to make it
easier for them to process it so you
could do that visually big fonts red so
on but the other things you can do is
you can relate it to things that they
already believe in what we call priors
right so if I I want to convince you of
something it might be a good idea for me
to think about what are you what do you
already believe
right and then try to tie that to what
you already believe because that will
require less processing or I could tell
you something twice of threee times now
of course this does it's not like I'm
going to tell you something really
really crazy right the Earth is flat
three times and you're going to believe
me right but I'm talking about these
things where like it could be true right
and so I tell you that a few times and
then eventually you you more likely to
believe it and you don't know it's
because you've heard it a few times so
if I
said salad and sugar are good for you
versus just sugar is good for you maybe
more people are more likely to believe
the first sentence because I've included
a statement that you know from prior
knowledge is true which is cabbage is
good yeah that that is a great example
that is a great example okay because our
brain goes yeah salad is good for you
and then you know by the time we get to
Sugar We're like okay that could be true
and also it makes you be more believable
and just to say you need a little bit of
sugar sugar is not only bad yeah little
bit so you talk toone about DEH
habituating Our
Lives why why and where do we need to
DEH habituate Our Lives what where do we
need to change things and introduce
novelty I'm almost wanting to come away
with a little bit of a little bit of a
checklist for my own life here I feel
like I'm I understand the part in
relationships which is take breaks from
my partner try new things with them you
said as well so go to new restaurants go
to new places do new things on the
weekend in work um quit my job I guess
that's what you're saying no absolutely
not no do not quit your job you know
change role add new responsibilities
yeah but you could it could even be
something as I mean you don't have to
completely change what you're doing but
you could at the same time try something
new and in fact you know from from you
know I'm sure you do that because you
have different things that you're doing
right and so that means you have Variety
in your day because you do your podcast
but then you also have your companies
and your companies are different right
so this is a good example but not
everyone has that right A lot of people
just have the one job but if you can
take on you know learn something new
right induce variety into your day in
that way that is great that will cause
you to start being on kind of a learning
mode right I take also from that that as
an employer it's really important that
we have all of our team members on a
personal development plan which means
making sure that they've got
intellectual Forward Motion in their
lives they're always learning something
new they're always striving for
something new and that every team member
in like my company should have something
they're currently learning about outside
of their core responsibilities right so
sometimes it's it would look like
they're going sideways yeah right so
sometimes it doesn't look like the the
path is like just progressing forward
but sometimes perhaps the plan is to go
a little bit sideways what you mean
sideways which means like it's not the
obvious thing yeah that they're going to
learn right for their role see
something's not going to become a better
editor or producer or whatever he's
going to learn music almost anything
different that you learn is probably
going to feedback yeah right yeah I
guess it's it comes right down to even
the route you cycle on the way to work
in the morning or small things right
small decisions you make hotels you stay
at the airline you choose to use is is
there any other ways that you've dehab
sit in your life Having learned about
this yes but I I want to just say
something about you said use different
airlines and so on so on one hand yes
but on the other hand if something is
not super enjoyable but you still have
to do it so for example maybe
flying maybe travel like when you're
traveling for business it can be painful
right so in those cases in fact you want
to do the same thing again and again why
because you you habituate to the
negative you see so if you think about
things that you don't like to do um you
may actually want to do it in the same
way over and over okay right because I
mean unless you think like you get on a
plane and you're super enjoy it but like
you know for me I just like want it to
be over with right so it's easier
actually to use the same airline to do
the same thing so in some parts of of
life actually you want to choose to do
the same thing and in fact in some parts
of life you want to um do these things
that you don't enjoy in one chunk you
know how we talked about the good things
you chop up MH the bad things you want
to swallow whole so if you think about
things that you don't like to do but you
really need to do like I don't know I
need to grade papers I need to do house
household chores when you ask people
like would you rather do this thing that
you need to do but you don't like would
you just get it over with um in one go
or do you want breaks in between for a
breather M people like breaks for a
breather right um if it is like I don't
know washing the floor or whatever there
is doing their taxes they want the
breakes but in fact they suffer less if
they just get it over with because then
they habituate to the
negative yeah right yeah makes sense so
for the positive you want variety and so
on and but the things that you're not
going to learn a lot from you just need
to get them over and done with just get
them over and done with and even do it
at exactly the same way that you've over
always done it is social media going
going to make me vicariously habituate
I.E through looking at other people's
lives and experiences they're having
it's moving my bar up like my my own
perception of expectations in my life up
in an unpleasant way so that when I go
to that same place that Jenny went to on
Instagram it's less enjoyable for me
because I've already kind of experienced
it through the lens of Jenny's Instagram
stories
right so this has a lot to do with what
do you what do we expect from life and
how do those expectations impact us
um so I think obviously social media is
causing us to have unrealistic
expectations we always I don't know for
most of us we feel kind of disappointed
with ourselves we go online is because
of course a lot of people go online and
they post the good things right oh I'm
on vacation I got this award and then
you go online and you're like oh all the
people all of this good things are
happening constantly and so you feel
disappointed about your own life you
have unrealistic
expectations um and it it shifts what we
call adaptation level so basically we
adapt to um our daily life and then
things that are better than our daily
life we feel good and things are worse
we feel worse but sometimes our
adaptation level can shift not based on
our reality but what we expect maybe
will happen and also what we see other
people are doing doing so let's talk
about expecting what will happen so it's
there's a study showing that when
prisoners are about to be
released they are still in prison but in
their mind they're already like thinking
about the release which is great and so
now their expectations are kind of
higher and that makes them feel worse
right so they're actually very close to
release but in fact they're feeling
really bad because their their daily
life is much worse from what they expect
their daily life to be that's kind of
like social media isn't it you're
satting your house looking out at people
partying in some hot Sunny Country
having the time of their lives you feel
like you're in prison your expectations
are being raised because you're watching
them have the time of their lives so
suddenly your house feels like you know
a prison yeah so your expectations can
be based on what you just expect for
yourself and also what other people are
doing now I'm not saying that um high
expectations are bad right because
there's two things happening at the same
time one thing is when um the outcomes
so this is related to dopamine neurons
so basically dopamine neurons in your
your brain are firing all the time right
and then when outcomes are better than
expected they fire even more burst more
right so you expect to get this amount
of salary you get a higher salary
dopamine goes up you expect the steak to
taste quite good it tastes even better
they fire more and when things are worse
than expected they start um quieting
down right so they're quieting down when
things are worse than expected and that
is highly correlated with your mood when
there's big burst of dopamine you feel
good when the dopamine is quiet you're
feeling bad but that quiet is important
because that quiet says things are not
as good as I expected them to be and it
signals to your brain I need to learn
something I need to change this right
there's two things you can change you
can change your expectations you can
lower them or you can change the reality
right and so this negative mood that is
associated with outcomes not being um as
good as you expected them can actually
lead to progress so it's a bit of a
delicate kind of balance right and so
often I mean there's this really
counterintuitive finding which is when
people don't have certain things in
their life for example in countries
where the Health Care system is quite
bad the Health Care System doesn't
affect people's daily happiness as much
as in countries where the Health Care
system is good so when the healthare
system is good you expect it to be good
so then any variation can impact your
your kind of satisfaction but if you're
living in a country where like well I
know the healthare system is bad I'm
it's not going to even affect how I'm
feeling right you have no expectations
and you're kind of that's not going to
impact your
happiness how much do you really know
about your health for me that answer was
simple the answer was very little until
whoop came along as you guys know they
sponsored this podcast but even before
then whoop was integral for me to know
what's going on inside my body most of
my friends my family and my team now use
[__] but I still have a few friends that
are on the fence about getting on board
and what I hear from some of those
friends is that they're a little bit
worried about what they might see in the
data and they might feel uncomfortable
about knowing what's going on inside
their body if I learned anything it is
that knowledge is power and once I
finally started to look at the data and
understand how getting less sleep was
affecting my body and how my old
lifestyle was actually hurting my
long-term Health everything changed for
the better so if this is something that
you'd like to try out head over to join.
whoop.com
CEO and you'll get to try whoop for 30
days risk-free with zero commitment try
it and let me know how you get on let's
talk about Zoe who you may know because
they're a sponsor of this podcast and
I'm an investor in the company you guys
know health is my number one priority
Zoe's growth story has been absolutely
incredible so far they're doing science
at a scale that I've never seen before
because of their members and recent
breakthroughs in research they can now
continue to offer the most
scientifically Advanced gut health test
on the market previously the test
allowed them to analyze 30 bacteria
types in your gut but now thanks to new
science they've identified a 100
bacteria types this is a huge step
forward and there's nothing else that's
available even close to it on the market
at all so to find out more and to get
started on your Zoe Journey visit
zoe.com
stepen you can use my exclusive code
ce10 for 10% off don't tell anybody
about that okay just for you guys I
remember you had a TED Talk didn't you
which did uh 15 million views on how to
motivate yourself to change your
behavior
okay yeah what can I take from that Ted
talk to achieve my new year new me
goals okay so um I talk about a few
principles there and one
is a lot of time our goals are in the
future so I want to go to the gym
because eventually I want to lose weight
I'm not going to lose weight that very
second right I'm not going to like get
into my jeans that very day eventually I
know that if I go to the gym I will
become healthier right so it's all a lot
of times about the future or you say I
want to get a promotion so I'm going to
work really hard today so I can get
promotion in the future the problem is
that it's really hard to motivate
yourself to do something
immediate for a reward that's going to
come a time from now so what you need to
do is you need to figure out what can I
get now I'm going to the gym because I
want to be healthier and you know
thinner or whatever in the future but is
there anything that I can get at the
very moment um I've heard people tell me
that the way that they motivate
themselves to get the gym is they say
when I get to the gym and I get on the
treadmill I'm G to allow myself to watch
some trash TV or uh read like you know a
magazine that I don't always allow
myself to read so that's one thing right
think about what the immediate rewards
that you can give yourself or someone
else maybe you're helping someone else
to to achieve their goals what can we
get immediately not only in the future
for for example another person told me
that their husband um they really wanted
their husband to go to the gym and so
the husband went to the gym and they got
back and the wife um said to the husband
ooh I can feel you're like I can see
your muscles right so it was immediate
right they gave him like immediate
rewards so try to think about I call it
like um Bridge the temporal Gap because
there's an action happening today and
there's this like goal in the future but
you have to bridge the temple Gap to try
to think about okay what can I also get
now it could be an emotional response
right I mean a lot of times when we do
something like we work hard we solve a
problem we go to the gym we feel good it
could be the emotional response so maybe
one way you can do is make that Salient
right maybe like track your your
emotions track your mood and you can say
okay this is what I did today right I
went to the gym today this is how I was
feeling right and so that's also an
immediate reward I was thinking about
this idea of discipline and what creates
discipline and I was
hypothesizing if there were to be a
discipline equation what it might look
like and I kind of concluded that
there's three parts to the things and
areas in my life where I've been able to
maintain discipline and the equation
looks something like this the start of
the equation would be the why like
however much I valued that goal so it
could be going to the gym or
whatever Plus the reward that I got from
the pursuit of the goal so the perceived
reward I got from the pursuit of the
goal so that's actually like going to
the gym doing the exercise being on the
treadmill the feeling after walking home
like the you know and then minus the
cost of the pursuit of the goal so
that's like having to like leave the
house get in the Uber put my shoes on
travel for 45 minutes wa you know use
lose two hours and if you want to be
disciplined in any are of your life you
need to therefore increase the why in
whatever way you can get really really
clear on why that matters and in your
case create those packs like a social
pack a financial pack whatever to make
it really important to you do whatever
you can to make the reward of the
pursuit of the goal more enjoyable might
be going with a friend or something
going to a gym that's closer I don't
know and then do everything you can to
reduce the cost of the pursuit of the
goal so right and the problem is that
the costs are often immediate yeah right
and then we we fall into What's called
the present bias or sometimes it's
called temporal discounting which is
that often we value what's happening in
the moment more than the same thing if
it was to happen in the future right um
and that's true for both like bad things
and good things things that are just
happening now our brain is like oh I'm
going to decide what to do based on this
immediate thing and the problem is that
the costs are often immediate right to
go 100% go yeah they come first right so
you have to overcome those costs and I
think one and as you're saying one thing
you could do is to try to get those
rewards closer in timee right so if I go
to to the gym I have to like walk to the
gym I might tell myself okay I can
listen to a podcast while I'm walking so
exactly exactly while I'm running yeah
Simon synic threw a really when I was at
his house talking to him about this he
threw objection at me he was like yeah
but this morning in La I got out of bed
and went and emptied the bins at 7: a.m.
because I knew if I didn't and there
would be repercussions so I ran that
through this framework and I was like
well your y was strong because the
repercussions of you not getting out of
bed are the been overflows you probably
get fined by the local Council the
reward of the pursuit of the goal really
wasn't there and the cost fortunately
was lower than the Y so discipline
occurred right and and that's because
we're sophisticated creatures right
we're not only driven I mean those
things immediately are are strong but
we're not only driven by them we have
these frontales right we're
sophisticated creature we can value
things that are in the future so when
I'm saying and I say you know immediate
is important I'm not saying future isn't
important for us and we don't use that
we do right and we're able to do that um
another thing that people do is they act
actually put in artificial costs for not
doing the right thing like a social pack
is one where announced it to the world
world on my Instagram that I'm going to
do it yes then there's a reputational
cost if I don't right right and uh for
example you know there's there's silly
things where people say I've heard this
when uh for writers and they tell I tell
the friends you know I'm going to send
you my chapter Monday at 700 a.m. and
first of all that's that's a pack right
I mean I have to send it because I told
you not because you're even going to
read it right but if I don't then I am
you know $100 is going to come into your
account like maybe you even already put
it you know as like a future thing which
you can stop right so there's a cost you
put a cost to what will happen if you
don't do that immediate
thing just goes to show I think
fundamentally that we're just driven by
incentives you know we think it's
something else but really at the very
fundamental level everything just seems
to be about incentives in business and
work in relationships in life absolutely
I mean every decision every action
conscious or unconscious is very much
about incentives right the good and the
bad I think what's interesting to me is
that those incentives are quite variable
they can be money um they can be food
they can be like social interactions
variety they can be variety yeah so the
what the incentives are is very variable
what you know what the good that I'm
getting also the bad right what what
feels bad a lot of different things can
feel bad so interesting so if you go if
you go down to like creatures low in The
evolutionary scale I think for them
things are more basic right for them
it's just like food temperature right
things like that that are really about
survival but as we go up and up and up
the ladder and we get to humans for us
there's a lot of different things that
can be incentivizing I was saying to one
of my colleagues the other day in a
business that I'm like a an investor in
he was telling me about one of his team
members who was like just a bit had lost
the love of the her work MH and he told
me the list of reasons she had said in
the like exit interview as to why she
wasn't enjoying her work and I looked at
the list of things and intuitively it
felt
like the person didn't actually know why
they weren and drink their work anymore
and so I had a conversation with this
person who was leaving this company and
um we got the very bottom of it and at
the very heart of it was just a loss of
meaning in the job they were doing they
couldn't answer um why it mattered
anymore they thought the work they were
doing no longer mattered and when you'd
asked them they would have said a lot of
other things you know they would have
point to small little things in this and
that and the office and whatever else
and the music that's playing and the but
at the very heart of it was actually
just an absence of meaning and people
aren't I don't think very good at
understanding that they've lost meaning
or that meaning is so important or that
what it is yeah and that goes back to
the survey that I mentioned um where
they found that the number one thing
that was important for people's
happiness was meaning and what does
meaning
mean does mean um I guess is that what
you're doing is
valuable right to um yeah two so that's
a good question I think it's probably
Beyond yourself I don't know maybe it is
even something about
immortality right wanting to feel that
what I'm doing is going to changed
something Beyond Myself um and it's it's
not necessarily about generosity
although you know generosity and could
be part of it but it's more about making
of a difference right Steve Job had had
this um saying that he he said something
like a dent in the universe right making
a dent in the universe I think a lot of
people want to do that and it you know
it don't have to invent the Mac to do
that it could also be how you affect
your family how you raise your children
right and that thing that those are the
kind of things that can continue to be
even when you're not there I've noticed
this
trend gen Z and the younger Millennials
are the change the world generation and
what I mean by that hit me out is that I
have so many young kids coming up to me
especially over the last what of 10
years generally that would say to me I
want to change the world and you'd ask
them like what do you mean that say like
I want to change the world um they can't
tell you necessarily what they want to
change about it but they want to be the
person that had that impact on the world
and I I think that sits in contrast to
what my father would have said as a 65y
old man if you had asked him at 20 years
old what do you want to do in your job I
don't think my dad would have said
change the world I think he would have
said I want to be a structural engineer
you know what I mean and I think the
going back to your point about um
habituation and people's desire to like
I don't know for immortality is it
plausible that because of social media
because we've seen a lot of world
changes we've adjusted our own I don't
know expectations of what are our own
contributions to now that this Young
Generation if they're not changing the
world or if they're not having such a
profound impact on things they don't
have the level of meaning has habituated
to now the base minimum of impact they
need to have is to change the world you
see what I mean you can't just get a job
right and when I when I said about a
dent in the
world I did not mean as as I said before
I don't mean like inventing the Mac it
could just be making a nice meal that
people enjoy right or something it could
be it could be things that are quite
small and you know thinking about your
father he wants to be an engineer but he
wanted to be an engineer but why right
he said that's what he wanted to do but
why did he want that right so he
probably I don't know but maybe he
wanted to be that because that would
enable him to
create new things MH right and so in
just creating new things you're changing
the world so I think I don't think he
was aiming at that though whereas the
young kids that come up to me they're
like aiming at that so they want to like
they want to change the world and they
haven't figured out how whereas my dad
wants to be like an engineer and the
consequences he ends up changing the
world yes but he probably wants to be an
engineer for some reason right I could
guess um and think he doesn't you know
people don't think about it change I
mean it's just we're using the same
words but I think these perhaps
different Generations have different
aspiration right um because changing the
world I when we say those when I say the
words I don't mean like changing the
world right I'm just saying saying doing
something that creates a change in your
world I mean maybe that's a better way
to do it better way to say it some kind
of change in your world not necess I'm
doing Global change like like Steve Jobs
but in some way this is a luxury and
that's true also even for your father's
generation and for this new generation
right wanting to have meaning is a
luxury that we have because we have our
basic needs right because we have food
and
shelter um and you know just like safety
the very very basic we can then start
thinking about meaning but on the the
other hand you can say well just being
able to care for my family and keeping
them safe that also has meaning um risk
in order to to change our lives we have
to sort of lean into risk in K is for
those people that are you know thinking
about changing their lives but they're
looking forward into uncertainty and
they're seeing risk um what advice would
you give them based on what you know
about habituation but more broadly from
the brain that's going to encourage them
to take that step into the unknown where
they believe risk lives yeah so we quote
the rock climber Alex Herold in in the
book and what he says is that that he
has a comfort zone which is kind of a
bubble around him and as he tries more
and more things that bubble just becomes
bigger and bigger and bigger he pushes
those boundaries and what happens is
that those things that seemed crazy to
him absolutely crazy then suddenly
become within the real of possibility
right I think the takeaway here is you
have to start you have to try and what
is helpful to know is that when even if
you try small so let's say there's you
their goal is quite up there it's like a
huge risk right yes but just try small
right and then suddenly The Next Step
wouldn't seem so crazy right and so on
and so forth we see that you know risk
habituates and it helps us explore
different things it helps us try new
things it can also go in a bad direction
right because of risk habituation what
is risk habituation risk habituation is
you do risky things when what we find is
that when people do risky things let's
say gamble we have a study where we let
people gamble um without letting them
know if they want or lost they just
gamble gamble gamble and we tell them at
the end okay they gamble they start
gambling just a little bit and then they
the next they gamble more and more and
more and more right they feel more
comfortable with gambling less anxious
right they also feel less excited so
they need to gamble more and so risk
really escalates because our emotions in
response to risk habituate so would risk
escalate so that's financial and I mean
that could be a bad thing right so it's
again it's like both things are at the
same time because you might take huge
risks because that that are you
shouldn't really take we do this with um
virtual risk as well so uh we want to
put we what we wanted to do is test
people's physical risk-taking but of
course we can't put them in danger so
what we did is we used virtual reality
and what we did is we used this game
where you put the headset on and then
you go up the elevator to a
skyscraper and you walk on a plank up up
up up in the air right it's all virtual
have you done this I have yes I did it
in New York City it was terrifying okay
yeah yeah it's tering terrifying it's
such a puz it's it's really interesting
experience because you know that you are
on the ground right I know that I'm in
my office I know that I'm safe but at
the same time my brain is completely
tricked yeah it's such you know it
really makes you feel quite humble and
how easy it is to trick your brain
you're feeling really scared and when we
let people do that they start off by
maybe taking one little step and two
little steps right and then the more
they do it they feel more comfortable
with it right they walk more and more
and more take more virtual risk until
you know 10 trials in they're jumping
right and we actually measure their
their anxiety we measure skin
conductance response and the more they
do it the less anxious they feel so they
take more risk and the less excited they
feel so they need more risk to take to
feel you know the same level of
excitement um yeah and I mean on one
hand they're exploring more in some
cases it could be dangerous for you and
you said in the book that people later
in their careers are more likely to have
accidents right um I think you said
athletes later in their career um have
accidents more and people on con
construction sites um have more
accidents later on in the project than
at the start of the project because they
start to take more of those risks it
made me think about you know the the
study you talked about where you get
people to gamble but they can't see the
results yet of their Reckless Behavior
there's many areas of all of our lives
where we're gambling with something but
we can't yet see the results of that
behavior whether it's like with our
health or whether it's habits we have
like smoking I'm
smoking I'm uh eating this this junk
crap over here and because I haven't yet
had the results come in the doctor
hasn't yet called me and told me there's
a problem I just keep going and my um
behavior Can escalate in those
departments until I get that phone call
which is like you've lost all your money
or your your health is you know you've
got something bad that's happened yeah
with long-term Investments right a lot
of the Investments financial investments
that we make are long-term mhm right so
we may start small and then we grow grow
grow grow and we don't know the outcomes
until years later so something
collapses what do you want people to to
come away from this conversation with
what is the uh the key
takeaway a lot of time people may not
feel so much joy in their life and then
they look around them and they conclude
that maybe I'm not feeling so much joy
because my relationship isn't that good
or you know my um job isn't that good
and you know maybe it is but maybe they
are good but they've just been the same
for a while so we have to be really
careful right and one way you know we
mentioned what you could do is just like
spice it up a little bit shake it up a
little bit right and see what happens
and and vice versa a lot of times they
are things that are negatively affecting
your life and you don't know it because
they're always there social media is one
example that you might you might a lot
of people may suspect that social media
Instagram Twitter is causing them a
little bit of an anxiety a little bit of
of stress but they don't really know for
sure you can't measure it until you take
a break right it's a bit like the Acy
noise looming in the background you
don't notice it but when you stop when
you turn it off you're sound like that's
so much better I didn't even realize
that this thing is causing me anxiety so
I think you know experiment I think that
you know the last chapter in the book we
We call we call it experiments in living
experiment in living because it's really
heart to know what are the things that
are that are really good in your life
and what are the things that are not so
good in your life until you make some
changes take a break from social media
for a few weeks do something different
for you and then you will see you write
about people taking a break from social
media don't you yes there's a great um
experiment that was conducted by The
Economist hunt Alcott where he took
1,000 people he gave them $100 to get o
um off Facebook for a month and he took
another 1,000 individuals and they he
gave them $100 to just continue what
they're doing at the end of the month he
came and he measured their well-being on
every single measure that he had those
people who quit for a month were happier
they were less anxious less depressed
less sad so in every measure they were
in a better state right and they were
surprised they had no idea that this was
going to have such a huge effect on them
but here's the even bigger surprise they
said that they were happier right they
fully admitted it but most of them
straight away at the end of the month
went back to Facebook right
um which is really interesting because
you acknowledge that that thing is
causing you you know a negative effect
on your health so when do you go back I
think there's two reasons one is you
gain information and knowledge that
knowledge may you know it may not make
you feel good but we value knowledge and
information and that's perhaps one
reason why the people went back um it
could also be something like addiction I
mean a lot of things um in life that
you're addicted to you kind of know
they're not good for you you know
they're not causing you have but there's
need right there's something pushing you
there was this crazy stat I read in your
book about the impact that leaving
social media had had on people equated
to getting a $30,000 pay rise at work
something like that so that that yeah it
was a study that was conducted by um an
Italian uh
scientist and what he he did he noticed
that when Facebook first started in 2004
it just started at Harvard right and
then a while later L they went on to you
know a lot of IV league universities one
by one very slowly and then 2008 they
opened up to the world and what he found
is that in every University that it
Facebook was introduced mental health
went down what was the reason he could
do the study is that the university had
measures of people's well-being they you
know because they actually measure it
quite often and he can see in every
University mental health went down every
University and then in the
population um Facebook was roduced in
2008 in the next 10 years the EP
depression episodes were increased by
80% now you don't know quation none of
this tells you cation it is only
correlational right interesting but you
know he so he's claiming that using
statistical methods he estimates that
potentially a quarter of this decline in
mental health can be due to uh social
media again you can't really it's not a
this is why the other experiment is a
little bit better because it's he the
other experiment hunt alcot manipulated
whether people were online or not so he
could actually do a control experiment
and measure it right um so he could show
cation this other study that suggests
25% of mental health um decline was
caused um due to social media that's a
correlational um result but you know
there could be some truth in it we have
a closing tradition on this podcast
where the last guest leaves a question
for the next guest not knowing who they
leaving it for and the question left for
you is what is one thing that people who
are listening could do that you
know about that would improve their
lives how about something
simple how about people just now email
call turn to someone and tell them they
love
them it would not you know doesn't
completely change your life but it will
change your
feelings at that very
moment Ty thank you really enjoy the
conversation and I'm uh so fascinated by
your work and it's a real service to
humanity what you do so thank you so
much it's been a pleasure thank
you a quick word on hu as you know
they're a sponsor of this podcast and
I'm an investor in the company after
years and years and years and years of
work and literally I remember being in
the boardroom about two to three years
ago at hu when they were working on this
product finally hu have nailed the
Complete Nutrition bar honestly it's
been one of the most popular
conversations at H for the last 3 years
how do we make a bar that is
nutritionally complete that has 27
minerals and vitamins and that is low in
sugar taste good I would have more of
them to show you had I not eaten them
all I mean they arrived at the office
yesterday and my team just uh scoffed
them all down and the last one you can
see it's actually ripped here because as
one of our team members went to eat it
some some shouted no we need that
tomorrow for the hu ad check it out I
know people are loving hu greens at the
moment because you guys have just
plastered my DMs asking for hu Greens in
the UK but in the meantime before hu
Daily Greens comes to the UK you've got
to check out the bars they've just
dropped because they are
delicious do you need a podcast to
listen to next we've discovered that
people who liked this episode also tend
to absolutely love another recent
episode we've done so I've linked that
episode in the description below I know
you'll enjoy it
[Music]